Eth send raw transaction conditional (#3523)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: docs/arbitrum-essentials/arbitrum-vs-ethereum/send-raw-transaction-conditional.mdx

---
title: 'eth_sendRawTransactionConditional'
sidebar_label: 'Conditional transactions'
sidebar_position: 4
description: 'Reference for eth_sendRawTransactionConditional on Arbitrum chains: the conditions you attach to a transaction, where Nitro evaluates them, the error codes it returns, and the node flags that control the checks.'
user_story: 'As a bundler or relay operator, I want to attach preconditions to a transaction so that the sequencer drops it instead of including a transaction that reverts against changed state.'
target_audience: 'developers who submit transactions programmatically, such as ERC-4337 bundler and relay operators'
content_type: reference
author: anegg0
sme: zk-lumi
displayed_sidebar: arbitrumEssentialsSidebar
---

> `eth_sendRawTransactionConditional` submits a signed <a data-quicklook-from="transaction">transaction</a> together with a set of preconditions. Nitro nodes evaluate those preconditions before the <a data-quicklook-from="sequencer">sequencer</a> includes the transaction. If any precondition fails, the node rejects the transaction and never includes it, so you pay nothing.

Reviewer: We should probably mention our implementation is based on [ERC-7796](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7796)

> The method extends `eth_sendRawTransaction`. It takes the same signed transaction payload and adds a second parameter that describes the state your transaction depends on.

Reviewer 2: eth_sendRawTransactionConditional can cause a large burden to the system. To avoid it we add a 1 second delay to any transaction incoming. The condition is measured twice - before and after the delay and must be true both times. It is designed to help actors (mostly AA bundlers) make sure nothing on-chain rugs them, but it cannot be used to detect short-lived on-chain opportunities.

<VanillaAdmonition type="info">

This method is not part of the standard Ethereum JSON-RPC API. Nitro implements it, and so do several other stacks, but the semantics differ between them. If you port a client from another stack, read [Differences from other implementations](#differences-from-other-implementations) first.

</VanillaAdmonition>

## When to use it

Use `eth_sendRawTransactionConditional` when your transaction makes sense only against a specific view of <a data-quicklook-from="chain-state">chain state</a>, and you would rather send nothing than send a transaction that reverts.

> [ERC-4337](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4337) account abstraction is the original motivation. A bundler packs many user operations into one transaction. Between the moment the bundler simulates the bundle and the moment the sequencer executes it, another transaction can change a nonce or a balance that the bundle depends on. The bundle then reverts, and the bundler pays the gas. When you list the storage slots the bundle depends on, that failure moves from "executed and reverted" to "rejected before execution".

Reviewer: This section is kind of confusing and seems unnecessary context - What does 4337 have to do with `eth_sendRawTransactionConditional` / how did it motivate it, and to whom?

The same pattern helps any submitter that pays gas on behalf of other people:

- Relays that sponsor meta-transactions.

> - Liquidation and arbitrage bots that must not act on a stale price.

Reviewer 2: it's designed not to be usable for liquidation and arb-bots

| Arbitrum Sepolia (Testnet)                               | `https://sepolia-rollup-sequencer.arbitrum.io/rpc` |

You can also send the transaction to any Nitro full node that forwards write traffic. The node carries your conditions to the sequencer unchanged. A node that rejects write traffic returns `publishing transactions not supported by this endpoint`.

<VanillaAdmonition type="caution">

The endpoints above are best-effort public endpoints with no service level agreement. If your application depends on availability, use a node provider or run your own node.

</VanillaAdmonition>

## Parameters

| Position | Type     | Description                                                                               |
| -------- | -------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 1        | `string` | The signed transaction, RLP-encoded and hex-prefixed. Same as `eth_sendRawTransaction`.   |
| 2        | `object` | The conditions. Every field is optional, and the node evaluates only the fields you send. |

The method returns the transaction hash, exactly as `eth_sendRawTransaction` does.

> Three transaction kinds never reach the condition checks. When you send a blob transaction, an Arbitrum internal transaction type, or a transaction without [EIP-155](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-155) replay protection, Nitro rejects it first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Three transaction kinds never reach the condition checks. When you send a blob transaction, an Arbitrum internal transaction type, or a transaction without [EIP-155](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-155) replay protection, a Nitro node running default configuration rejects it before it evaluates your conditions.
```

### Conditions

Nitro reads three different sources when it evaluates your conditions: the <a data-quicklook-from="parent-chain">parent chain</a> block number, the <a data-quicklook-from="child-chain">child chain</a> block timestamp, and child chain contract storage.

| Field                                 | Type     | Your transaction stays valid only while…                  |
| ------------------------------------- | -------- | --------------------------------------------------------- |
| `knownAccounts`                       | `object` | Each listed account still holds the storage you describe. |
| `blockNumberMin` and `blockNumberMax` | quantity | The parent chain block number sits inside the range.      |
| `timestampMin` and `timestampMax`     | quantity | The child chain block timestamp sits inside the range.    |

> <ImageZoom src="/img/arb-conditional-tx-scope.svg" className="img-900px" caption="Each conditional option reads a different source." alt="Three boxes. blockNumberMin and blockNumberMax read the parent chain block number. timestampMin and timestampMax read the child chain block timestamp. knownAccounts reads child chain contract storage." />

Reviewer: Its a little confusing the order of these is different than the table above

    }
  }
}
```

An entry that maps an address to an empty object carries no condition, and Nitro evaluates the remaining conditions as usual.

## Where Nitro evaluates your conditions

Nitro evaluates your conditions three times. Knowing where each check happens tells you which failure you are looking at.

<ImageZoom src="/img/arb-conditional-tx-checkpoints.svg" className="img-900px" caption="Nitro evaluates conditional transaction conditions at three points before inclusion." alt="A vertical flow. Your app signs the transaction and attaches the conditions, then sends it to a prechecker node. The prechecker runs check 1 against current state and check 2 against state about two seconds old. The sequencer runs check 3 against the block it is building, then includes the transaction in a child chain block. If any check fails, the node rejects the transaction with JSON-RPC error -32003 and never includes it." />

1. **The <a data-quicklook-from="prechecker-node">prechecker node</a> evaluates current state.** The node you submit to evaluates your conditions against its latest block before it forwards anything.

> 2. **The prechecker evaluates older state.** The node then walks back to a block that is at least `required-state-age` seconds old, which defaults to 2 seconds, and evaluates the same conditions against that older state. A failure here returns the original message behind the prefix `conditions check failed for old state`.

Reviewer: According to Claude (should be verified by Nitro): 

> The actual loop in tx_pre_checker.go walks back until either the state is 2 seconds old or it has walked required-state-max-blocks blocks (default 4), whichever comes first. 
> - On Arbitrum One with ~250ms blocks, defaults mean the old state is typically only ~4 blocks (~1 second) old, not 2 seconds. 
> - And on a quiet chain where the latest block is already 2+ seconds old, the walk-back lands on the same header and the second check is skipped entirely - so a condition that became true in the latest block passes. Neither direction of the "last 2 seconds" claim is a guarantee. 
> 
> Suggested framing: "walks back up to required-state-max-blocks blocks looking for state at least required-state-age seconds old, and re-checks against whatever it lands on - with defaults on Arbitrum One that's roughly the last ~1 second; when the head block is already old enough, the second check is skipped."

| `execution.tx-pre-checker.required-state-max-blocks` | `4`     | How many blocks the node walks back to find that older state. `0` removes the limit.      |
| `execution.tx-pre-checker.strictness`                | `20`    | Below `20`, the node skips the condition checks and forwards your transaction unverified. |

For the full list, see the [Nitro CLI flags reference](/run-arbitrum-node/nitro/cli-flags-reference.mdx).

Nodes export one accepted counter and one rejected counter for each of the three checks. Compare them to tell a client that sends stale conditions apart from a node that rejects on old state.

| Check                                 | Metric prefix                                  |
| ------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| Prechecker, current state             | `arb/txprechecker/conditionaltx/currentstate/` |
| Prechecker, state about 2 seconds old | `arb/txprechecker/conditionaltx/oldstate/`     |
| Sequencer, block being built          | `arb/sequencer/conditionaltx/`                 |

## Limits

> Nitro sets no cap on the number of accounts or storage slots you list in `knownAccounts`. Every listed slot costs the node a state read on each of the three checks, so a large `knownAccounts` map stays cheap for you and grows expensive for the node.

Reviewer: Is this something we should call out? How do we enforce DOS on this?

<VanillaAdmonition type="warning">

Nitro enforces no built-in cap, so operators who expose this method publicly should apply their own request-size and rate limits at the RPC layer. Treat an unlimited endpoint as a denial-of-service surface.

</VanillaAdmonition>

List only the slots your transaction depends on. For an ERC-4337 bundle, that usually means the nonce and deposit slots of each sender, rather than the storage root of each account.

## Differences from other implementations

Other stacks expose a method with the same name and a different contract. If you port a bundler or relay to an <a data-quicklook-from="arbitrum-chain">Arbitrum chain</a>, check these four points.

| Behavior                              | On Arbitrum chains                                                                                                |
| ------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `blockNumberMin` and `blockNumberMax` | Read the parent chain block number. Other stacks read their own chain's block number.                             |

Reviewer: What other stacks? Are we positive about this?

Reviewer: "may" could be a good way to be safe

> | Old-state re-check                    | Nitro also evaluates your conditions against state about 2 seconds old. Other stacks evaluate current state only. |

Reviewer: What other stacks? Are we positive about this?

Reviewer: "may" could be a good way to be safe
